Working on software projects in a team is very different from working alone. When I first started working with Git and GitHub in group projects, I struggled with managing branches, merging code, and avoiding conflicts. So, in this article, I’ll share simple and beginner-friendly Git commands that students can use while collaborating in teams.

Prerequisites
Before you start, make sure you have:

A GitHub account
VS Code installed
Git installed on your device
The Git extension enabled in VS Code
1. Uploading a Local Project to Github
Step 1 — Create a Remote Repository

Go to GitHub → Create a new repository

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Step 2 — Initialize Git inside your project folder

git init                    // start tracking a folder with Git

Step 3 — Stage your files

git add .                  
or add specific files:

git add <filename>
Step 4 — Commit your changes

git commit -m "First commit"

Step 5 — Rename your current branch to main

git branch -M main
Step 6 — Connect your local repo to GitHub

git remote add origin https://github.com/<username>/<reponame>.git
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Step 7 — Push your code

git push -u origin main
Press enter or click to view image in full size

✅ Your project is now on GitHub

2. Working With Branches in a Team
When working in teams, never code directly in the mainbranch. Instead, create your own branch.

Create a new branch:

git checkout -b dev                      // creates a new branch and switches to it immediately

Make your changes, then commit and push:

git add .
git commit -m "Updated feature"

git push -u origin dev
Press enter or click to view image in full size

3. Creating a Pull Request (PR)
A Pull Request is how we propose changes before merging them into the main project.

It allows teammates to:

Review code
Suggest improvements
Prevent mistakes from breaking the project
Pull Requests exist so that work is reviewed before merging — not just pushed directly. This is the key to clean and safe collaboration.

Subscribe to the Medium newsletter
How to create a Pull Request

Go to your GitHub repository
Click Pull Request → New Pull Request
Set:
Base branch: main(main project)
Compare branch: dev(your changes)
4. Click Create Pull Request

5. After review → Click Merge Pull Request


Now update your local main branch:

git checkout main
git pull origin main
Press enter or click to view image in full size

4. When Another Team Member Clones the Repo
Step 1 — Clone the repo

git clone <repo-url>
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Step 2 — Enter the project

cd your-project
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Step 3 — Switch to the working branch

git checkout dev
After making changes:

git add .
git commit -m "My update"
Press enter or click to view image in full size

git push -u origin dev
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Then a Pull Request is created again to merge dev → main.


5. Keeping Your Branch Updated with Main
Press enter or click to view image in full size

When someone else’s work is merged into main, you need to update your own branch.

Step 1 — Switch to main

git checkout main
Step 2 — Pull latest updates

git pull origin main
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Step 3 — Switch back to dev

git checkout dev
Step 4 — Merge main into dev

git merge main

Your dev branch now has the newest code.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Final Tips for Team Git Usage

Always pull before starting work (git pull)
Use meaningful commit messages
One feature = one branch (keep things clean)
Use Pull Request so everyone reviews changes